Memorandum
Memorandum PERAC Memo #11: Mandatory Retirement Board Member Training – 2nd Qtr 2024
Date:	
03/28/2024
Referenced Sources:	
PERAC Website
PERAC Memo #11, 2024

To All Retirement Boards:
TO:                  All Retirement Boards

FROM:            Bill Keefe, Executive Director

RE:                  Mandatory Retirement Board Member Training – 2nd Quarter 2024

DATE:            March 28, 2024

Chapter 32 mandates retirement board members to complete training during each year of service on the retirement board. This requirement has two elements: 18 credits over the course of the member’s term and at least 3 credits in each year of the term. Failure to meet either of these statutory standards will prohibit the member from serving beyond the conclusion of the term for which the training requirement was not met. We urge board members to utilize the full array of training choices in order to remain eligible to serve. All classes, webinars, seminars, and conferences listed will earn three credits each, unless otherwise noted.

Ways to receive your credits:

Credits for attending live PERAC webinars and the MACRS Conference are automatically updated by PERAC staff approximately one week after the event.
All attendees must register through the links available on our website.
Board members seeking educational credits – it is important that you register with your full name and the email address we have on record so we can accurately update your account.
Board members must check in each day at MACRS to receive full credit.
You must submit a completed Training Affidavit in PROSPER for all other trainings, including pre-recorded PERAC webinars and pre-approved webinar and conference attendance. Any session listed under sections I through IV are pre-approved.
If a Certificate of Completion is offered for any training not directly provided by or sponsored by PERAC, you must submit the certificate through PROSPER to receive credit.
Please note the full name of the recorded session you have viewed when submitting a Training Affidavit in PROSPER.
Some sessions require pre-registration. Check individual sessions for closing dates.
The Commission appreciates all the retirement board members who are making a good faith effort to fulfill their duties and responsibilities. We look forward to seeing you in person at the upcoming MACRS Conference this June.

I. Training Schedule Dates (pre-registration is required)

Date	Topic/Organization	Location / Registration Information
April 11	Open Meeting Law	Webinar
9:30 a.m.	AGO	tinyurl.com/041124-ago
April 24	Boards and Commissions	Webinar
1:00 p.m.	OIG Academy ($29.00)	tinyurl.com/042424-oig
 	 	 
 	 	 
May 6	Open Meeting Law	Webinar
6:00 p.m.	AGO	tinyurl.com/050624-ago
May 16	Disability Basics	Webinar
10:00 a.m.	PERAC	tinyurl.com/051624-per
May 18-22	NCPERS TEDS/NAF/ACE	Conference, Seattle, WA
 	Cost varies, see website for more info	ncpers.org  
May 23	Contract Administration Overview	Webinar
10:00 a.m.	OIG Academy ($29)	tinyurl.com/oig-contract-overview
June 1-5	MACRS TEDs and Spring Conference	Conference, Hyannis, MA
 	PERAC/MACRS	macrs.org
June 4	Chief Procurement Officer Responsibilities	Webinar
1:00 p.m.	OIG Academy (Free)	tinyurl.com/oig-cpo
June 12-14	NCTR System Directors’ Meeting	Conference, New York, NY
 	NCTR, see website for more info	nctr.org
August 3-7	NASRA Annual Conference	Conference, Pittsburgh, PA
 	NASRA, see website for more info	nasra.org/meetings
Date	Topic/Organization	Location / Registration Information
II. Recently Added or Recurring Pre-Approved Online Training
(available on demand)

Organization	Topic	How to find webinar:
Office of the Inspector General	Inspector General Videos
You must watch all three videos	mass.gov/service-details/inspector-general-educational-videos
Office of the Attorney General	Open Meeting Law Training
You must watch all six videos	go.usa.gov/xpPx5
National Council on Teacher Retirement	
New 2024 webinar added:

The latest on GPO/WEP
See our website for the link: mass.gov/service-details/perac-online-training
PERAC  	
Cash Books & Annual Statement

Review this webinar for the latest updates on submission requirements and best practices.
mass.gov/info-details/preparing-the-2023-annual-statement
Organization	Topic	How to find webinar:
Links to all of the above resources can be found on PERAC’s Education page at
mass.gov/perac-education. Members can view the recordings and receive 3 educational credits by completing a Training Affidavit in PROSPER.

III. MACRS June Conference (up to nine credits)

Registration is open for the Massachusetts Association of Contributory Retirement Systems (MACRS) Spring Conference. See their website, macrs.org, to register. PERAC, in conjunction with MACRS, will be making educational opportunities available for retirement board members and staff. This year’s conference will also include the weekend Trustee Educational Seminars (TEDs) offering board members an opportunity to earn additional credits.

Conference dates: June 1-5, 2024

Location: Emerald Resort & Conference Center, Hyannis, MA

Registration: macrs.org

Per statute, nine (9) is the maximum number of credits that can be offered. The breakout will be as follows:

Trustee Educational Seminars (three credits collectively for TEDS)
Chapter 32 in a Nutshell
Pension Calculations
Post Retirement Employment
The Legal Panel Session during the main MACRS Conference (three credits)
Wednesday, June 5, 2023, PERAC sessions (three credits)
Popular Pension Misconceptions  
IV. Conflict of Interest Online Training (three credits)

The State Ethics Commission no longer offers live webinars for the Conflict of Interest Law training. With their new online training system, users must create a login to take the training and receive a certificate:

Go to mass.gov/how-to/complete-the-conflict-of-interest-law-education-requirements
If your retirement system is not listed in the dropdown menu, please have your board contact the State Ethics Commission at ethicstraining@mass.gov. They will add organizations upon request.
A certificate of completion is still required to receive credit for this training and credits may only be awarded once every two years.
V. Other Opportunities to Obtain Educational Credit

The Commission is willing to approve other educational credits for a variety of events sponsored by “…local, state, regional and national organizations recognized by the Commission as having expertise in retirement issues of importance to retirement board members or other entities…”  

Additionally, the Commission has approved education credit for participating in webinars.  We will entertain requests for credit in relation to relevant webinars provided that such a request is made well in advance of the session.

Approval for credit must take place well in advance of the date of the event or webinar.  This will enable the Commission to analyze the program and provide a general notice to other retirement board members to maximize participation. Once approved, you must complete the Training Affidavit in PROSPER to ensure proper credit. Board members experiencing Extenuating Circumstances in meeting educational requirements should review Memo 15 of 2019 and contact PERAC with any questions.  

The following list of local and national organizations provide additional educational opportunities that may be relevant for retirement board members:

American Society of Pension Professionals and Actuaries (ASPPA)
City/Town Sponsored Conflict of Interest or Open Meeting Law Training
Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA)
International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans (IFEBP)
MA Association of School Committees Open Meeting Law Training
MA Town Clerks Association Ethics Training
National Association of State Retirement Administrators (NASRA)
National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems (NCPERS)
National Council on Teacher Retirement (NCTR)
National Pension Education Association (NPEA)