Memorandum
Memorandum PERAC Memo #20: Mandatory Retirement Board Member Training – 3rd Quarter, 2025
Date:	
06/30/2025
Referenced Sources:	
PERAC Website
PERAC Memo #20, 2025

To All Retirement Boards:
TO:                  All Retirement Boards

FROM:            Bill Keefe, Executive Director

RE:                  Mandatory Retirement Board Member Training – 3rd Quarter, 2025

DATE:            June 30, 2025

Chapter 32 mandates retirement board members to complete training during each year of service on the retirement board. This requirement has two elements: 18 credits over the course of the member’s term and at least 3 credits in each year of the term. Failure to meet either of these statutory standards will prohibit the member from serving beyond the conclusion of the term for which the training requirement was not met. We urge board members to utilize the full array of training choices in order to remain eligible to serve. All classes, webinars, seminars, and conferences listed will earn three credits each, unless otherwise noted.

Ways to receive your credits:

Credits for attending live PERAC webinars, the New Administrator Training, and the Emerging Issues Forum are automatically updated by PERAC staff approximately one week after the event.
All attendees must register through the links available on our website.
Board members seeking educational credits – it is important that you register with your full name and the email address we have on record so we can accurately update your account.
You must submit a completed Training Affidavit in PROSPER for all other trainings, including pre-recorded PERAC webinars and pre-approved webinar and conference attendance. Any session listed under sections I through V are pre-approved.
If a Certificate of Completion is offered for any training not directly provided by or sponsored by PERAC, you must submit the certificate through PROSPER to receive credit.
Please note the full name of the recorded session you have viewed when submitting a Training Affidavit in PROSPER.
Some sessions require pre-registration. Check individual sessions for closing dates.
The Commission appreciates all the retirement board members who are making a good faith effort to fulfill their duties and responsibilities. As a reminder, please remember to update your records with our new address: 10 Cabot Road, Suite 300, Medford, MA 02155. We look forward to seeing you at Emerging Issues in September and wish you an enjoyable summer!  

I. Training Schedule Dates (pre-registration is required)

Date/Time	Topic/Organization	Registration / Location
July 10	Chapter 32 and Federal Taxation (part 2)	Register for Webinar
1:00 p.m.	PERAC/Ice Miller	 
July 13-16	25th Annual Trustee Workshop	Register for Conference
 	NCTR Conference	Williamsburg, VA
July 15	Understanding Leadership	Register for Webinar
10:00 a.m.	OIG Academy	 
July 23	Fraud Awareness	Register for Webinar
10:00 a.m.	OIG Academy	 
July 29	Fiduciary Responsibility Training	Register for Webinar
12:00 p.m.	NPEA	 
July 31	Open Meeting Law	Register for Webinar
6:00 p.m.	AGO	 
August 9-13	Annual Conference	Register for Conference
 	NASRA	Seattle, WA
August 12	Open Meeting Law	Register for Webinar
12:00 p.m.	AGO	 
August 17-19	Public Pension Funding Forum	Register for Conference
 	NCPERS	Chicago, IL
August 19	Chief Procurement Officer Responsibilities	Register for Webinar
1:00 p.m.	OIG Academy	 
August 20	New Administrator Training	Register for Training
 	PERAC	Northampton, MA
September 12	Open Meeting Law	Register for Webinar
10:00 a.m.	AGO	 
September 17	Emerging Issues Forum	Registration opens next month!
9:00 a.m.	PERAC	Westborough, MA
September 25	Open Meeting Law	Register for Webinar
1:00 p.m.	AGO	 
September	Economist Update	Register for Webinar
(date tbd)	NPEA	 
October 4-7	103rd Conference	Register for Conference
 	NCTR	Salt Lake City, UT
October 18-21	Annual Conference	Register for Conference
 	NPEA	Salt Lake City, UT
Date/Time	Topic/Organization	Registration / Location
II. Recently Added or Recurring Pre-Approved Online Training 
(available on demand)

Organization	Topic
Office of the Inspector General	Inspector General Videos
You must watch all three videos
Office of the Attorney General	Open Meeting Law Training
You must watch all six videos
National Council on Teacher Retirement	
New webinars added:

Global Economic Forum (part 1)
Global Economic Forum (part 2)
Preparing for Full Funding – Ahead of Time
Global Investing Amidst U.S. Policy Uncertainty
National Institute on Retirement Security	
New webinars added:

Social Security Tradeoff Analysis
2025 Global Economic Outlook
Organization	Topic
Links to all of the above resources can be found on PERAC’s Education page at 
mass.gov/perac-education. Members can view the recordings and receive 3 educational credits by completing a Training Affidavit in PROSPER.

III. Conflict of Interest Online Training (three credits)

The State Ethics Commission no longer offers live webinars for the Conflict of Interest Law training. Users must create a login to take the training and receive a certificate:

Go to mass.gov/how-to/complete-the-conflict-of-interest-law-education-requirements
If your retirement system is not listed in the dropdown menu, please have your board contact the State Ethics Commission at ethicstraining@mass.gov. They will add organizations upon request.
A certificate of completion is still required to receive credit for this training and credits may only be awarded once every two years.
IV. New Administrator Training

Our next round of New Administrator training begins on August 21, 2025, in Northampton. The same training will be repeated again this fall in Danvers and next spring in Norwood.

This all-day training is designed for newer administrators and board staff with less than five years of experience, however, all staff and board members are welcome.

Date: August 20, 2025, 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.

Location: Hotel Northampton, 36 King Street, Northampton, MA 01060

Credits: Retirement board members who attend will receive three educational credits.

Register through PROSPER. If an individual wishing to attend does not have access to PROSPER, please contact Rose Morrison at rose.a.morrison@mass.gov.

V. Emerging Issues Forum

We will be returning to the DoubleTree by Hilton in Westborough, MA for the Emerging Issues Forum this year. The agenda and registration link will be published in mid-July.

Date: Wednesday, September 17, 2025, 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.

Location: DoubleTree by Hilton, Computer Drive, Westborough, MA

Credits: Retirement board members who attend will receive three educational credits.

Room block: new this year – we will have a very limited room block available for individuals wishing to drive to the venue the night before at a rate of $165 plus tax for a standard room. These rooms are available on a first come, first served basis through August 16, 2025. You can reserve the room directly through the hotel through the following link: Public Employee Retirement Administration Commission Booking Link.

Please contact Natacha Dunker at natacha.a.dunker@mass.gov if you would like to request a reasonable accommodation to attend PERAC sponsored in-person trainings or Forums.  

VI. Other Opportunities to Obtain Educational Credit

The Commission is willing to approve other educational credits for a variety of events sponsored by “…local, state, regional and national organizations recognized by the Commission as having expertise in retirement issues of importance to retirement board members or other entities…”   

Additionally, the Commission has approved education credit for participating in webinars.  We will entertain requests for credit in relation to relevant webinars provided that such a request is made well in advance of the session.

Approval for credit must take place well in advance of the date of the event or webinar.  This will enable the Commission to analyze the program and provide a general notice to other retirement board members to maximize participation. Once approved, you must complete the Training Affidavit in PROSPER to ensure proper credit. Board members experiencing Extenuating Circumstances in meeting educational requirements should review Memo 15 of 2019and contact PERAC with any questions.   

The following list of local and national organizations provide additional educational opportunities that may be relevant for retirement board members:

American Society of Pension Professionals and Actuaries (ASPPA)
City/Town Sponsored Conflict of Interest or Open Meeting Law Training
Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA)
International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans (IFEBP)
MA Association of School Committees Open Meeting Law Training
MA Town Clerks Association Ethics Training
National Association of State Retirement Administrators (NASRA)
National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems (NCPERS)
National Council on Teacher Retirement (NCTR)
National Pension Education Association (NPEA)